ICT167 Principles of Computer Science
Lab Practice Week 1
Students should install NetBeans IDE 8.2 software (this software package includes
the appropriate Java Development Kit). Unless you wish to use the command line
interface for your work, just installing NetBeans IDE 8.2 will install the required Java
functionality. See the extra notes available on LMS for more information.
What to submit: your solutions to questions 2 and 3 – you may be ask to demo your
program to your tutor.
You should submit your Lab Practice work on a weekly basis to your tutor. Your tutor
will expect to see them by your next session. Do not fall behind or leave it to end of
the term as the workload will be very heavy towards the end of the term.
Note: even though you only need to submit those exercises mentioned above, you
should attempt all exercises in each lab practice to help broaden your understanding;
this may also help with your assignment work.
Exercises
Before starting the exercises, make sure you have read the relevant materials and all
the materials covered in your Lecture notes for Topic 1 (part 1 and part 2).
As many of the exercises involve modifying previous answers, it is strongly suggested
that (in such cases) you copy your project from a previous exercise, then paste and
rename it for your current exercise. You can then modify as needed.
1. Download the program TwoDPs.java from the unit LMS website and save the
file in your working directory. Use the NetBeans IDE development
environment, create and build a project using the source file that you just
downloaded. Execute the program.
Note: You cannot assume that the code provided has no error, as you are
expected to debug the code and make sure that it works as expected.
2. Create a new project called Trunc.java either by copying and modifying
TwoDPs.java or by typing that source code from scratch. Trunc.java should
loop around getting floating point (i.e. type double) numbers and displaying
both the number and the running total to the nearest whole number. The
program will finish when a number is entered outside of the range -100 to
100. The program should use methods to check whether the number is in this
range, and then rounded to the nearest whole number. (NOTE: You are not to
use the JAVA Round method but write your own method by modifying the
calcTwoDPs method in TwoDPs.java).
ICT167 Principles of Computer Science
3. The following question is adapted from ICT159 and serves as revision. You
are to adapt the algorithm that you had learnt in the past, and write the
program in JAVA for this exercise.
Write the JAVA program that reads a string with a maximum length of 30 from
the keyboard. The program should then copy the characters from that input
string into a second character array (in order of input). However, only if a
character is a vowel (a, e, i, o, u) should it be copied into the second array.
Once copied, the program should output the values stored in the second array
(in order of input). The program should then count and display the number of
times each vowel appears in the second array. Also, the program should
determine and output the index in the second array where each vowel first
appeared or display a suitable message if a particular vowel is not in the array
at all.
Example of input as follows.
Enter a string to a maximum length of 30:
I am doing a unit in Murdoch University
The string is too long. Please enter again.
Enter a string to a maximum length of 30:
A unit in Murdoch University
The output of the second array is:
auiiuoiei
The counts are as follows:
a=1
e=1
i=4
o=1
u=2
The index of the second array where each vowel first appeared:
a = 0
e = 7
i = 2
o = 5
u = 1
Another example of input as follows.
Enter a string to a maximum length of 30:
aaaaaa
The output of the second array is:
aaaaaa
ICT167 Principles of Computer Science
The counts are as follows:
a=6
e=0
i=0
o=0
u=0
The index of the second array where each vowel first appeared:
a = 0
e is not in the input
i is not in the input
o is not in the input
u is not in the input
